welcome to topcast and to
part two of my discussion of chapter
seven a conversation about justification
from the fabric of reality by david
deutsch now actually this is the
third ish episode on this particular
chapter i've inserted
a supplementary episode which is a
discussion about some material in
realism and the aim of science which is
a very long book by karl popper written
some time after the logic of scientific
discovery which was his first book and
in that book in realism in the aim of
science among other things he talks
about something called corroboration now
i bring that up and i found it relevant
to the present episode into the episode
before that which was kind of an
introduction to the conversation that
we're going to have today the literal
conversation about justification because
you can see papa there trying to escape
from the prevailing view of epistemology
the prevailing view of epistemology at
the time of course was well you observe
stuff and you observe stuff repeatedly
and you become more certain you confirm
your theory in some way by repeatedly
observing things and you think that that
theory is more likely to be true
something like that and popper rejected
this whole idea popper rejected the idea
that theories became
more likely to be true or you could
assume they were more likely to be true
based upon your confirming instances
based upon you
seeing what you expected to see
the whole all swans are white thing and
so you're observing white swans and you
become more convinced apparently the
more white swans you see that in fact
it's true that all swans are white of
course this particular process of
predicting the color of swans and
prediction in general is not even the
aim of science which is what poppa's
whole project was he was trying to
explain something completely new
something he the two that no one had
really understood about what the
creation of knowledge was and what
science was all about
so you can see him trying to escape
the mire in which he finds himself the
philosophical mire of his contemporaries
and of the people that went before in
trying to explain stuff about
explanation
and in trying to get away from what
they're saying he's still using their
language and you can see that he's well
in my opinion trying to fill a void in
our language in our vocabulary which
doesn't need to be filled
you can do away with it you can do away
with so many of these words by his own
lights by the way in which he explains
epistemology and how it works by the
fact that what we're after are
criticisms we're using this critical
method to try and refute bad ideas
leaving us with a best existing idea
it's either that or we've got nothing at
all we're not in the position of trying
to
weight different ideas or to justify a
particular idea is more likely to be
true than some other idea we're just not
in that position it just doesn't come up
it's not a problem to be solved hence
the whole problem of induction is a
chimera itself it didn't need a solution
as such the solution is it was never a
problem in the first place because
induction isn't a thing there is no hole
at the center of science where we need
to try and become confident in our
theories because the king of knowledge
is something like mathematics or logic
or something like that and what we're
trying to start with are absolutely
certain foundations and on that building
an edifice of ever more certain claims
about reality that's just not what's
going on poppa's entire conception turns
out on its head what we're doing is
we're conjecturing we're guessing we're
creating explanations that can be tested
against reality and can be shown to be
wrong and if we can't show them to you
wrong well
lucky for us we've learned something
about reality we we keep hold of that
bit of stuff that bit of information
about reality and we call it knowledge
something we know about reality okay so
this is what we explain here at top cast
this is what david deutsch explains
throughout the beginning of infinity and
why it should be relevant for me to go
all the way back to karl popper and the
realism in the aim of science and talk
about this corroboration stuff is
because david uses the language of
corroboration here in this chapter and i
think quite rightly once again speaking
in the language of people who are going
to disagree and there are still people
who disagree today bayesianism we have
to admit is still a far more popular and
an ascendant even epistemology people
still have this idea that
what science is about is trying to
predict the future and you're trying to
be more and more sure or confident or
certain that this particular theory is
actually a true account of reality or
something like that so if you've ever
been in a conversation with someone who
disagrees with popularity epistemology
it can sometimes be difficult to get
across what you're saying because just
simple things like claiming to know
something in the papillion framework
means you have an explanation
it could mean you have an intuition but
in any case you have some idea that
solves your problem that's what it means
to know something you've got a solution
of some kind sometimes you can know how
to ride a bike without having an
explicit explanation of what's going on
what you've got is inexplicit knowledge
and a whole bunch of implicit
assumptions about exactly how you might
body moves and that kind of thing but
you know how to ride a bike it's a form
of knowledge even if you can't explain
it in words or you can't explain it
fully in words poppa's account of
knowledge takes account of this kind of
thing because among other things it's
knowledge that can be improved over time
you never need to justify as true this
bit of knowledge that you have about how
to ride a bike or how to swim or any of
this other inexplicit stuff it's stuff
that
inexplicit knowledge just isn't stuff
that performs a part of anything like
bayesian epistemology or induction and
whatever the case we're talking about
explicit explanations
the rules don't need to change not all
that much we don't move from having
guesses about how to do stuff like ride
a bike or guesses about what reality is
like into an area of certainty that's
not what's going on so here in this
chapter before us chapter seven a
conversation about justification david
is going to have an imaginary
conversation with someone who doesn't
think that they're an inductivist so
they're called the crypto inductivist
but they have an induction shaped hole
in their way of thinking about the world
they don't understand why we should rely
on our existing theories our best
existing theories of reality our
scientific theories they think that
crypto inductivist thinks there needs to
be some process by which we justify by
which they presumably mean justify as
true any given theory that we have at a
particular time and david is rejecting
that whole idea as popper indeed
rejected that whole idea but our
language our common language between
populians and non-perions and just
person on the street thinking about
stuff well we share this language we
call english and we have a whole bunch
of words some of which can be quite
misleading justification is one of them
what does justified really mean well it
could mean something like showing as
true given some assumptions you already
know are true now never mind how you
know those assumptions are true of
course you don't putting that aside as
david said and as i'll emphasize again
now
in the introduction to the audiobook
version of this he said there that when
he uses the word justified or
justification he in the fabric of
reality what he intends is the normative
claim in other words saying not that our
best theories are justified as true but
rather you are justified in the sense of
you should use your best theory what
else could you do you want to explain
some sort of cosmological phenomena like
gravitational lensing well the only
thing you can do it is right you are
justified in using the general theory of
relativity you're justified in using the
evolution by natural selection in order
to
go through the process of explaining
exactly how it is that certain species
exists in reality right now on planet
earth and presumably any life that
exists out there elsewhere in the
universe you're also justified in
assuming that that life there has also
evolved via a process of natural
selection because we know of no other
process and all we can go on if we have
problems like let's say one day we
observe alien life and we want to
explain where did that come from our
best theory is that all life no matter
where it is and of what form has evolved
via a process of evolution by natural
selection now could that be wrong of
course it could be wrong so we're not
justified in thinking our theory is true
literally true but we're justified in
using it why in order to solve our
problem the best that we can at any
given time and
solutions to problems don't need to be
the final ultimate optimal solution for
all time and everywhere they just need
to solve your problem now
to your satisfaction to the scientists
satisfaction to the satisfaction of
being able to say problem solved and
move on to the next best problem the
next most interesting problem the next
thing that is important to you okay so
i'm not going to read the entire
dialogue today here
in chapter seven because it's a long
dialogue and i think that listeners to
topcast
if you've made your way through the
beginning of infinity you'll have a
solid grounding in an understanding of
what epistemology is all about so i just
want to highlight sections of the
conversation that can be illuminating to
us and just to of course enjoy the
clarity of david deutsch's writing on
this i'm also going to pause at certain
places where i think that as i did in
the last episode about this about this
particular chapter proper where i was
saying that well we could probably
rephrase this in a slightly different
way in light of david's own more recent
work on this
in light of what david says in the
beginning of infinity and amongst other
things in his paper his even more recent
paper than the beginning of infinity
that paper being the logic of
experimental tests and i think that that
now
as far as i'm aware
is the pinnacle of our understanding of
exactly what science is about
and the role of things like observations
experiments
in scientific discovery
that is right now our most refined
understanding of things and so we can
draw a line if you like all the way from
pre-popular stuff to what we might say
is early popper and in realism in the
aim of science popper admits he's got an
early version of himself and the early
version of himself in the logic of
scientific discovery was saying things
like and he admits he admits himself
that this was an error saying things
like theories can have a degree of
confirmation
now he was wrong about that and he
admits he was wrong about that and so he
moves on to degree of corroboration
because he thinks that some theories are
more probable than other theories and we
of course now think this is wrong
following the work of david deutsch so
david deutsch has done stuff in
epistemology since the fabric of reality
which kind of does away with some of the
ways of phrasing these things and so
there's a more refined way of
understanding some of this stuff
certainly in the beginning of infinity
and certainly in something like
the logic of experimental tests his
academic paper on this and if you're
interested in that it's it's kind of
hard going it's it's focused on well the
full title of the paper is the logic of
experimental tests particularly of
evaretti and quantum theory and so it
can get quite technical in places now
i've written a guide about this and it's
on my website just called
the philosophy of science and there is a
podcast all about devoted to this as
well if you're interested in that you
can go all the way back to topcast
episode 22 the logic of experimental
tests where for a little over an hour i
go through my understanding of and my
reading of the logic of experimental
tests certainly just excerpts thereof
and so that too can form a supplement to
something like this episode where we are
looking at the debate between popeyrians
and purpurian epistemology
and
well the rest of people who think about
how it is that science accomplishes what
it does or what the purpose of science
is and why we should rely upon our best
explanation at any given moment in time
why this is a debate
from our point of view is a mystery
after all what else can you do but rely
upon your best existing theory and if
you can't show your best existing theory
as actually finally once and for all
true in some way who cares you've got
nothing else to rely on
and i guess push come to shove a
reasonable bayesian would say the same
thing but one wonders what they're
really engaged in if they're trying to
increase their confidence increase their
credence in a particular claim okay
without further ado now i did think to
myself without further ado i say and
then he goes on to make more of an ado
i did think to myself should i get one
of my friends or someone else to play
the role of david or play the role of
crypto inductivist and
thereby have a proper dialogue and uh
after much thought about this i thought
no
i will just read both parts so this may
become a little bit irritating and i'm
not going to try and be a voice actor
for this i'm just going to read it dry
and
pause where i think there are
interesting things to talk about okay so
let's go this is the beginning of the
actual dialogue the actual conversation
about justification that david has in
the fabric of reality chapter seven and
he begins with himself asking the
question of the crypto inductivist david
says quote since i read what papa has to
say about induction i have believed that
he did indeed as he claimed
solve the problem of induction but few
philosophers agree
why and the crypto inductivist replies
because papa never addressed the problem
of induction as we understand it what he
did was present a critique of
inductivism inductivism said that there
is an inductive form of reasoning which
can derive and justify the use of
general theories about the future given
evidence in the form of individual
observations made in the past it held
that there was a principle of nature the
principle of induction which said
something like observations made in the
future are likely to resemble
observations made under similar
circumstances in the past attempts were
made to formulate this in such a way
that it would indeed allow one to derive
or justify
general theories from individual
observations they all failed poppa's
critique though influential among
scientists especially in conjunction
with his other work elucidating the
methodology of science was hardly
original the unsoundness of inductivism
had been known almost since it was
invented and certainly since david
hume's critique of it in the early 18th
century the problem of induction is not
how to justify or refute the principle
of induction but rather
taking for granted that it is invalid
how to justify any conclusion about the
future
from past evidence
and before you say that one doesn't need
to and david interjects one doesn't need
to the crypto inductivist then comes
back with but one does that is what is
so irritating about you papillions you
deny the obvious obviously the reason
why you are not even now leaping over
this railing is in part that you
consider it justified to rely upon our
best theory of gravity and unjustified
to rely on certain other theories of
course by our best theory of gravity in
this case i mean more than just general
relativity i am also referring to a
complex set of theories about such
things as air resistance human
physiology the elasticity of concrete
and the availability of mid-air rescue
devices end quote so remember the
context here what's going on as the two
characters david and the crypto
inductivist are standing at the top of
the eiffel tower and the whole point of
the dialogue is that david is trying to
explain
why he is justified in relying upon the
best existing theories as to why he
shouldn't jump over the railing
and the crypto inductivists are saying
well no you haven't properly justified
that claim there's no good reason so to
speak for relying on this best theory so
there's some back and forth at this
point between david and the crypto
inductivist and i'll just leap to the
point where the crypto inductivist tries
to summarize david and david's argument
and what the crypto inductability says
is quote so to summarize you believe
that the evidence currently available to
you justifies the prediction that you
would be killed if you left over the
railing end quote now dear listener if
you hear something like that let me just
say it again
the crypto inductivist is saying to
david you believe that the evidence
currently available to you justifies the
prediction that you would be killed if
you left over the railing does anything
spring to mind it perhaps should the
evidence
doesn't justify anything what's the
point of evidence
the point of evidence the purpose of
evidence why one gathers evidence in
science at all
is to decide between theories already
guessed
it's not there its function is not to
justify as true or as more true a
particular theory
instead it just rules out some whole
bunch of theories and it's only
explained by
the soul standing theory so the crypto
inductance is wrong to summarize david
in that way
also the crypto inductivist is
absolutely focused on prediction now in
this particular case i guess that being
focused on prediction is what it's all
about after all they're debating whether
or not one is justified in leaping over
the railing and thinking they are or are
not going to be killed given the best
current explanation but the
justification for not leaping over the
railing from the top of the eiffel tower
is all about the fact that
not the general relativity and those
other theories that were mentioned
earlier are absolutely true or anything
like that it's just that it's the only
theory you've got it's the only theory
you've got everything else has already
been ruled out by various other
experiments and so that theory allows
you to derive certain predictions there
are certain consequences that follow one
of which is well anything that goes over
that railing is going to hit the ground
and be destroyed upon impact that's just
what happens a prediction
i say is a
something you logically derive from a
given explanation a given good
scientific explanation it's just a
consequence it's one of the things that
follows from assuming all else equal
which is often a hard thing to do you
can't always assume all else being equal
because in our real world
people's choices human creativity comes
into play rather often so only in very
well-controlled environments like in a
laboratory can you do properly
controlled experiments and this is why
prediction is valid there
we could say if you like the predictions
made in laboratory where you have
carefully controlled your variables and
all of the conditions and you understand
the functioning of the equipment well
then you are justified on relying upon
the predictions but outside of the
laboratory things get more tricky
things get more tricky especially in the
realm of human affairs and that includes
things like anything happening on the
earth which could be
geological or meteorological or climate
related or to do with the extinction of
animals or not the evolution of life now
on earth is very much affected by the
choices that people make and so our
capacity to predict the behavior of
systems here on earth
depends upon knowing what people will do
to impact those systems and we can't
predict what people will do especially
people of the future we don't know what
knowledge they will have or will create
and so this is why prediction outside of
the carefully controlled laboratory and
by the way that includes the carefully
controlled laboratory of deep space
which presumably there aren't people out
there affecting things just yet but
places where you can ignore the choices
and effects and of people and knowledge
creation if you can do that then you've
got a set of valid predictions otherwise
what do we say we say we've only got
prophecies
wild guesses where we presume that we
know the content of our future theories
and often when it comes to prophecy
people are assuming they know the
content of those future theories to be
exactly the same as the content of
theories today in other words whatever
problems we have today will still be
there in a hundred years because we
won't have created the knowledge to fix
the problem then or something like that
when you hear about people talking about
the distant future and some existential
catastrophe that's on the way
talking about that today
they're engaged in pure prophecy they
don't know what the next generation is
going to do they don't know what they
are going to do
20 years from now which could have an
effect on the very problem they are so
agitated in being worried about right
now and i think it's good for people to
be worried about certain problems today
that could have an effect in decades to
come but
making prophecies about this particular
thing actually happening well that's
wrong so that's the distinction between
prediction and prophecy but here we're
focused on prediction so
let me go back and recap what the crypto
inductivist has just said and and go on
with what david's response is so the
crypto inductivist has just said quote
so to summarise you believe that the
evidence currently available to you
justifies the prediction that you would
be killed if you leapt over the railing
david says no it doesn't and the crypto
inductability says but damn it you are
contradicting yourself just now you said
that prediction is justified and david
says it is justified but it was not
justified by the evidence if by the
evidence you mean all the experiments
whose outcomes the theory correctly
predicted in the past
as we all know that evidence is
consistent with an infinity of theories
including theories predicting every
logically possible outcome of my jumping
over the railing the crypto inductivist
is so in view of that i repeat the whole
problem is to find what does justify the
prediction that is the problem of
induction
and david says well that is the problem
popper solved end quote
and quite right and what i'll say here
because i'm just going to skip over a
whole bunch of things is if you cast
science in terms of being a project
about trying to predict the future and
almost nothing but
this process of
generalization or
extrapolation that a set of observations
in the past should continue off into the
future because
you can draw a straight line through a
particular trend
without an explanation you're assuming
an explanation the explanation you're
assuming is
that that observation in the pa that set
of observations of the past is somehow
necessarily required by laws of physics
or something like that and so therefore
there is a law of physics or something
that ensures that what you've seen in
the past will continue to be seen in the
future which isn't much of an
explanation it's just kind of assuming
there's an explanation beneath all this
but you're not searching for
explanations you're searching for
generalizations
extrapolations the ability to
make predictions this is the whole
reason induction is just so vacuous
pointless
a a a misguided attempt to understand
what is going on with science
science
like every other domain that is of
interest to people in academic circles
or just in problem solving in general
it's actually about
creating explanations about
understanding the world and once you
have some understanding then if you're
lucky you might be able to make a
prediction about something sometimes not
sometimes even our best explanations
don't allow us to make predictions it's
kind of in the physical sciences and
even then not all the physical sciences
but in the physical sciences we can make
some predictions sometimes under some
circumstances as i already said one of
the trope examples i like to use is well
we we have this
theory of acids and bases
there are these two kinds of chemicals
that exist in the world
one creates hydronium ions when
dissolved in water these things are
called acids uh to a first approximation
you say it's the hydrogen ion h plus
that goes floating around in solution
it's not quite like that by the way it
actually creates these things called
hydronium which is h3o plus never mind
that whatever substance dissolved in
water that produces such ions we call an
acid and on the other hand we have these
things called bases which when dissolved
in water produce
the hydroxide ion the hydroxide ion is o
h minus it's a negative charge and so
things like sodium hydroxide or
potassium hydroxide these are bases and
they can be used when combined with fats
to make soap but never worry about that
now all of the soluble bases we have
this word called alkali and so alkalizer
is just a name for a base which will
dissolve in water because there are
certain bases that don't dissolve in
water
now bases are alkalis dissolved in water
to produce the hydroxide ion o h minus
and to a first approximation the acids
when dissolved in water produce h plus
the hydrogen ion now when you mix an
acid and a base of equal concentration
equal amounts and the correct molarity
and all this sort of stuff what you get
the products that you get from the
reactants the reactants are acid plus
base is something called a salt plus
water now where did the water come from
the water came from
the hydrogen ion over here from the acid
h
plus the hydroxide ion from the base o h
minus over there h plus o h gives you h2
o water and so that's where the water
comes from when you mix an acid in a
base so you combine an acid and a base
what am i telling you all that for well
that's a good explanation about what's
going on chemically with stuff and it
allows you to make specific predictions
that's the general universal rule that
anywhere in the universe that you happen
to have an acid dissolved in water and a
base dissolved in water then you will
get
a salt and water being produced as the
products and so you take a specific
example in my trope example i like to
use this because it's the one i can it's
the one i can easily do in my head
is hydrochloric acid which is hcl that's
the chemical formula for it and then
sodium hydroxide naoh
this is probably the easiest reaction of
all
equal concentrations and equal amounts
of that will produce as products got hcl
plus naoh you will get
sodium chloride nacl that's plain old
table salt and h2o
that's a prediction so if you give me
any acid and you give me any base which
can dissolve in water then i should be
able to tell you what the salt is what
the specific salt is that is going to be
produced
as well as being water
that's a prediction i can make that kind
of prediction and in fact any reasonably
competent high school chemistry student
would also be able to tell you precisely
what the concentrations are required and
the volumes are required this is the
process of titration by the way you can
figure out the concentration of an
unknown base
given a certain concentration of a
particular acid and you combine these
things together and you can do quite
simple calculations you pull out your
periodic table in your pocket calculator
and you can calculate this stuff so you
can make even more precise quantitative
predictions about this kind of stuff
this is physical chemistry and organic
chemistry allows you to do the same
thing this is the wonderful thing about
chemistry it allows these precise
very precise predictions exceeded
perhaps only by physics itself but then
sticking within the realm of physical
staff we only have to move to
geology
and suddenly the systems become
too complex for us to make precise
predictions we understand some stuff but
we don't understand enough to make the
predictions that we would like to if
only we could
for example we can't predict earthquakes
and we can't predict volcanic eruptions
not to the precision and accuracy that
we would like to we'd like to be able to
have
warnings well ahead of time that a
particular earthquake is going to happen
in a major city and do whatever it takes
in order to protect people and
structures and that kind of thing but
instead what happens is the earthquake
happens the buildings fall down people
get hurt and then we come to have a
better understanding after the fact of
how earthquakes happen
but we don't have the capacity just yet
just yet to make these predictions ahead
of time and that's a shame and that's
just geology rocks moving around well
tectonic plates but you get my point
these are by comparison simple systems
as compared to well anything involving
human affairs one day we'll be able to
predict when earthquakes are happening
are going to happen one day presumably
it must just come down to physical
forces and it must just come down to
how much stress is being placed upon
these tectonic plates which we don't
have the ability to measure precisely
just yet but perhaps one day we will we
must be able to one day and then then
we'll be justified in the future relying
upon the prediction from that good
explanation we just don't have a good
enough explanation just yet we are right
we are justified in predicting
following a good explanation of how
acids and bases interact exactly what
for example concentration of base we
need to neutralize a particular acid
that's another prediction that we can
make and we're justified in relying on
certain calculations okay that's the
normative things to do we should use
chemistry in order to solve those kind
of problems problems in titration let's
say and if someone's talking about
jumping over the railing of the eiffel
tower we are
justified in predicting they're going to
hit the ground at such a velocity that
it'll kill them now why because our best
explanation the combination of our best
explanations but chief among them
general relativity says that you're
going to accelerate towards the ground
at a particular rate
slowed only a little by things like air
resistance but your skull is going to
hit the ground and you're going to be
dead and that conclusion is justified in
the sense that it
follows from the assumption that all
those other theories are good
explanations about what's going to
happen they don't have to be true in any
final sense but they capture some truth
about reality some truth and some of the
truth is that they're going to
accelerate towards the ground so once
again we have more back and forth
between david and the crypto inductivist
and i'm going to pick it up where the
crypto inductivist says quote now listen
carefully because you have just said
something which is not only provably
untrue but which you yourself conceded
was untrue only moments ago
you say
that the outcomes of experiments quote
refuted all the rival theories end quote
but you know very well
that no set of outcomes of experiments
can refute all possible rivals to a
general theory you said yourself that
any set of past outcomes is i quote
consistent with an infinity of theories
including theories predicting every
logical possible outcome of my jumping
over the railing end quote it follows
inexorably that the prediction you favor
was not justified by the experimental
outcomes because there are infinitely
many other rivals to your theory also
unrefuted as yet which make the opposite
prediction
and david responds quote i'm glad i
listened carefully as you asked for now
i see that at least part of the
difference between us has been caused by
a misunderstanding over terminology when
popper speaks of rival theories to a
given theory he does not mean the set of
all
logically possible rivals he means only
the actual rivals those proposed in the
course of a rational controversy that
includes theories proposed purely
mentally by one person in the course of
a controversy within one mind end quote
and this is just me talking now yes of
course now it is impossible it would be
impossible to enumerate all the
logically possible theories there
wouldn't be a set it would be some weird
class of things
and
if we take the world view of the
beginning of infinity seriously then we
must presume there are an infinite
number of theories
better than our best existing theory yet
to be generated that's part of the
beginning of infinity that we will get
ever closer and closer to describing
reality without getting ever a final
description of reality because reality
itself has this infinitely complex
character the universe is vast beyond
our imagination and every time we
discover something new about it it
reveals a whole bunch of new phenomena
that we are only just scratching the
surface of and we're always just
scratching the surface so there must be
this in theory infinite number of
theories yet to come we're never going
to get to the end of our process of
scientific discovery no matter what
people say what about no matter what
books are
written about the end of science no
matter what other podcasters say that
we're almost there with the completed
science of this that or the other no
we are
coming to understand objective reality
ever better over time but the end is
nowhere near in sight isn't that fun
that's great that's cool that means
there's always something new to do
and you can start anywhere and point
yourself in any direction and there will
be problems and you'll be able to make
progress so it's not possible to rule
out
all of the theories because there's a
whole bunch of theories an infinite
number as i just said that are better
than your existing theory okay you're
yet to think of them no one has yet
thought of them but they will they will
think of them because they will need
those to solve problems yet to be
encountered problems that will only be
encountered once
certain problems have been solved now
with our existing theories so you know
the the existing theories there are
certain problems with for example the
meshing of quantum theory and general
relativity you know what is the the
ultimate nature of reality is it
discrete or continuous is it some other
hitherto unimaginable third thing i
don't know but the fact is we don't know
the ultimate constituents of matter and
we may never know the ultimate
constituents of matter because there
might not be ultimate constituents of
matter we just keep finding smaller and
smaller different different things that
themselves are made up by other things
so i'm skipping ahead and uh the the the
crypto inductivist objects to being
called an inductivist at all because
they don't believe in induction as they
say as the crypto inductivist says quite
offended quote it really is perverse to
call a person an inductivist if that
person's whole thesis is that the
invalidity of inductive reasoning
presents us with an unsolved
philosophical problem and david says i
don't think so i think that that thesis
is what defines and always has defined
an inductivist but i see that papa has
at least achieved one thing inductivist
has become a term of abuse anyway i was
explaining why it's not so strange that
the reliability of a theory should
depend on what false theories people
have proposed in the past
even inductivists speak of a theory
being reliable or not given certain
evidence
well porpyrians might speak of a theory
being the best available for use in
practice given a certain problem
situation and the most important
features of a problem situation are
what theories and explanations are in
contention what arguments have been
advanced and what theories have been
refuted corroboration is not just the
confirmation of the winning theory it
requires the experimental refutation of
rival theories confirming instances in
themselves have no significance end
quote yes so
this is one of the motivations for my
immediate prior episode to this one
where it's titled corroboration
because i think papa was trying to
escape from this kind of language and i
think i can see here and of course i
can't speak for david but i can see here
that david doesn't use this kind of
language in the beginning of infinity or
much at all since the fabric of reality
because i think it's kind of superfluous
to our needs
as he says there quote corroboration is
not just the confirmation of the winning
theory now what i would say and i think
even poppa kind of admitted is that well
confirmation is not a thing what does
confirmation mean to confirm something
means to
show us true in some way
or it just means the observation is
consistent with the theory but we've
already said here in this chapter
already that you know there are an
infinite number of theories that could
be consistent with any set of
observations fine so we don't need to
worry about
confirmation and i think for similar
reasons we don't need to worry about
corroboration either all of these things
are kind of on the positive side of the
ledger trying to support a theory in
some way but we don't need to support a
theory at all
if it's the only existing theory and
this is our situation in science and
everywhere we have our theory it is
exceedingly rare
exceedingly rare i'm just laughing at
myself because i think i've said this
phrase
so often recently that it's exceedingly
rare to have multiple theories of
anything at all you know at the moment
you look at something like um dark
energy and people might very well say to
me well this is a problem but you look
up the wikipedia article and there's all
sorts of theories about dark energy and
i would just say no
no
none of them count as theories in the
sense that i'm talking about them
what a theory is in my usage of the word
here now of course theory can just mean
any old wild guess that you like
but it should mean good explanation and
this is what we're really talking about
when we're talking about having
multiple competing theories that make a
claim about reality what we're saying is
multiple competing good hitherto good
explanations of reality hard to vary
hard to vary accounts of the world
postulating the existence of specific
physical things in the case of newtonian
gravity the postulation of a physical
force an action at a distance that
travels instantaneously between bodies
okay that's a that's postulating a real
physical thing that we can
experimentally test for and in fact
fails the test and on the other hand
you've got general relativity
postulating the existence of a true
fabric of space-time that can bend and
warp in the presence of mass and energy
and we can test for that too and in fact
it passes the test now not to say that
it's confirmed as true or anything like
that it's just it's gone unrefuted and
if you want to explain stuff like
gravitational lensing or the bending of
light during an eclipse or what's going
on with a black hole you've only got one
explanation now forget support we don't
need to support it like why what's the
point what help is support in that
situation let's say we had a hundred
points of support great well what's the
rival there's no rival it's not like
there's something else over there with
90 points of support there's nothing
the next best thing you've got is
newton's theory of gravity it's already
refuted it can't do any of this other
stuff it can't explain precisely what's
going on with gravitational lensing it
can't explain black holes in the same
way it can't explain gravitational waves
so on and so forth just so much stuff
now there's only one thing and this is
true
across science i mentioned earlier the
the theory of acids and bases
the modern understanding of that
whatever the chemists call it now
there is no rival theory there used to
be different rival theories about what
an acid and a base were was and and how
they behaved but the history of science
shows that there was a this gradual
process of incremental improvement where
the previous theories of acids and bases
were ruled out leaving us with the
modern understanding the same as the the
history of the atoms another interesting
one where people just didn't know they
kind of had the idea there was an atom
but what was the structure of an atom no
one knew was it kind of like this plum
pudding model where the protons and
neutrons and electrons all just mash
together it took a while for us to
escape from that view to moving towards
something that looked kind of like a
solar system to today where you've got
this
set of fungible instances of an electron
in orbits
you know with scare quotes around the
word orbit the nucleus where
the nucleus is made of protons which are
really made of quarks and and the
electrostatic force and the heisenberg
uncertainty principle is sort of in
tension and this is why you have atoms
so
this is our modern understanding and it
has refuted all the previous theories of
atomic theory
so is true with acids and bases so true
of gravity and so this is our situation
and by the way not just in science you
can talk about theories of history you
can talk about theories of aesthetics
you can talk about theories of morality
now sure in some of these areas there
are still debates raging
but generally speaking broadly speaking
we have a theory and explanation and
there are no rivals when a problem
arises then creativity needs to start
then you need to start thinking up
new explanations and if you're really
lucky and you try really hard then
you'll find the explanation
the explanation you want
it's not you create too you'd be in a
very fortunate position if you you know
you were able to create
two rival solutions to the problem that
you have but that usually isn't what
happens you've got an existing theory
you make an observation which doesn't
seem to fit
with your existing theory so you've got
this problem so
then you create another theory and so
then you figure out ah this theory this
theory
explains why
that observation doesn't fit with that
theory but my new theory it does explain
the observation then you've got you're
back to one again you've gone from one
to one this is what happens okay so yeah
never mind corroborating never mind
confirming never mind saying that one
theory is more probable than any other
you've just you've got the one you've
got the one okay let me keep on going
the crypto inductivist says having just
been told basically that by david quote
crypto inductivist here saying very
interesting i now understand the role of
a theory's refuted rivals in the
justification of its predictions under
inductivism
observation was supposed to be primary
skipping a little and he goes on to say
in the popular picture of scientific
progress it is not observations but
problems
controversies theories and criticism
that are primary end quote perfect
wonderful that's exactly right the
crypto inductivist has
got it
he goes on to say experiments are
designed and performed only to resolve
controversies therefore only
experimental results that actually do
refute a theory and not just any theory
it must have been a genuine contender in
a rational controversy constitute
corroboration pausing my reflection yeah
i don't need the corroboration bit right
so you've got
therefore only experimental results that
actually do refuse a theory and not just
any
theory
it must have been a genuine contender in
a rational controversy
we don't need to say that constitutes
corroboration although as i said in my
last episode unless of course you think
this corroboration thing is a synonym
for
refutation which would be a bit weird we
don't need both we can just say we've
got these competing theories one of
which
gets refuted leaving us with only one
now you could call that process well
we've corroborated this one existing
theory it just gets a little bit
misleading that's all i would say it
kind of it suggests that we've confirmed
as more likely true something or that
it contains more truth it's closer to
describing reality than the one that has
been refuted of course it's necessarily
the case okay skipping a bit and uh the
crypto inductivist goes on to say quote
suppose that a theory has passed through
this whole process once upon a time it
had rivals then experiments were
performed and all the rivals were
refuted but it itself was not refuted
thus it was corroborated
what is it about being corroborated that
justifies our relying on it in the
future and david says
since all its rivals have been refuted
they are no longer rationally tenable
the corroborated theory is the only
rationally tenable theory remaining
pausing in my reflection again i don't
wanna i think this might be the last
time i just go back and and say this
sort of thing
but again
it would seem to me that we can just do
away with that way of saying things
instead of saying the corroborated
theory is the only rationally tenable
theory remaining you just say the
unrefuted theory is the only rationally
tenable theory remaining and again if
corroborated means unrefuted
very well the crypto inductance goes on
to say it quote but that only shifts the
focus from the future import of past
corroboration to the future import of
past refutation the same problem remains
why exactly is an experimentally refuted
theory not rationally tenable is it that
having even one false consequence
implies that it cannot be true and david
says yes and the crypto inductivist goes
on to say but surely as regards the
future applicability of the theory that
is not a logically relevant criticism
admittedly a refuted theory cannot be
true universally in particular it cannot
have been true in the past when it was
tested but it could still have many true
consequences and in particular it could
be universally true in the future and
david responds this true in the past and
true in the future terminology is
misleading
each specific prediction of a theory is
either true or false that cannot change
what you really mean is that though the
refuted theory is strictly false because
it makes some false predictions
all its predictions about the future
might nevertheless be true in other
words a different theory which makes the
same predictions about the future but
different predictions about the past
might be true the crypto inductive says
if you like so instead of asking why
refuted theory is not rationally tenable
i should strictly speaking of asked why
does the refutation of a theory also
render untenable every variant of the
theory that agrees with it about the
future even a variant that has not been
refuted david says
it is not that refutation renders such
theories untenable it is just that
sometimes they already are untenable by
virtue of being bad explanations
and that is when science can make
progress for a theory to win an argument
all its rivals must be untenable and
that includes all the variants of the
rivals which anyone has thought of but
remember it is only the rivals which
anyone has thought of and that need be
untenable for example in the case of
gravity no one has ever proposed a
tenable theory that agrees with the
prevailing one in all its tested
predictions but differs in its
predictions about future experiments i
am sure that such theories are possible
for instance the successor to the
prevailing theory will presumably be one
of them but if no one has yet thought of
such a theory how can anyone act upon it
and the crypto inductivist says what do
you mean no one has yet thought of such
a theory i could easily think of one
right now and david says i very much
doubt that you can and the crypto
kryptonite says of course i can here it
is whenever you dave a jump from high
places in ways that would according to
the prevailing theory kill you you float
instead apart from that the prevailing
theory holds universally end quote
okay
i am not going to read the next few
pages of well i'll read a little bit
i'll read a little bit but basically
the whole idea is here that the crypto
inductivist claims to have invented a
theory on the spot namely that the the
prevailing view of gravity holds always
all the time universally except that in
this particular case just ad hoc uh he
floats now i say and as david will go on
to say of course this is not a theory
this is not an explanation this is
not genuinely solving any problem at all
it's just an ad hoc modification with uh
an assumption that that comes out of
nowhere
the whole purpose of science is a
problem-solving exercise that's what
we're doing this solves no problems in
fact it introduces problems it breaks
the existing theory and this is what
david says so let me just read the
relevant part because um
just as with david
that's david's character
the krypton ductivist is an irritating
person
these people almost exist in real life
anyway so so the crypto doctor says
what's wrong with this theory why can't
i just to make this ad hoc modification
you know what fault
what mistake have i made
david explains quote
just about every fault in the papillion
book your theory is constructed from the
prevailing one by appending an
unexplained qualification about me
floating that qualification is in effect
a new theory but you have given no
argument either against the prevailing
theory of my gravitational properties or
in favor of the new one you have
subjected your new theory to no
criticism other than what i am giving it
now and no experimental testing it does
not solve or even purport to solve any
current problem nor have you suggested a
new interesting problem that it could
solve worst of all your qualification
explains nothing but spoils the
explanation of gravity that is the basis
of the prevailing theory it is this
explanation that justifies our relying
on the prevailing theory and not on
yours thus by all rational criteria your
proposed qualification can be summarily
rejected end quote and i
i think that you know this is the point
at which the the judge comes along and
hammers the gavel this case closed kind
of thing you know i but but still the
crypto inductivist goes on and on and on
trying to
um say the ways in which well you know
you're still not justified uh he gets to
a point the crypto inductivist where he
says well i could use this
this new new verb
ex floats to describe situations in
which
you well you you might fall to the
ground but but in other cases you just
happen to float unsupported so i can
invent new language and stuff like that
so he says the crypto inductance says
but when the theory is translated into
my language no qualification is manifest
and on the contrary a manifest
qualification appears in the very
statement of the prevailing theory and
david says
so it does but not all languages are
equal languages are theories in their
vocabulary and grammar they embody
substantial assertions about the world
whenever we state a theory only a small
part of its content is explicit the rest
is carried by the language like all
theories languages are invented and
selected for their ability to solve
certain problems in this case the
problems are those of expressing other
theories in forms in which it is
convenient to apply them and to compare
and criticize them one of the most
important ways in which languages solve
these problems is to embody implicitly
theories that are uncontroversial and
taken for granted while allowing things
that need to be stated or argued about
to be expressed succinctly and cleanly
and the crypto inductivist accepts that
and david goes on to say thus it is no
accident when a language chooses to
cover the conceptual ground with one set
of concepts rather than another
it reflects the current state of the
speaker's problem situation that is why
the form of your theory in english is a
good indication of its status vis-a-vis
the current problem situation whether it
solves problems or exacerbates them but
it is not the form of your theory that i
am complaining about it is the substance
my complaint is that your theory solves
nothing and only exacerbates the problem
situation this defect is manifest when
the theory is expressed in english and
implicit when it is expressed in your
language but it is no less severe for
that i could state my complaint equally
well in english or in scientific jargon
or in your proposed language or in any
language capable of expressing the
discussion we have been having it is a
papillion maxim that one should always
be willing to carry on the discussion in
the opponent's terminology end quote now
i would just say there's a lot there
that is extremely useful for day-to-day
life you know if you're engaged in a
discussion with someone especially in
philosophical discussions where
people tend to like to just philosophize
in completely abstract terms
divorced from physical reality or any
other kind of reality for that matter
you know the thought experiments the
trolley problems and that kind of thing
what you want to say to them in these
situations is a simple question ask a
simple question what problem are you
solving what problem are you solving
okay and let them go down the road and
if if it's a completely abstract problem
about you know well these people are
tied to a railway and you have a lever
and say well hold on
that that is an imaginary situation can
we bring it back to something in the
real world and let's talk about
something in the real world and let's
get to let's say moral principles or
what's physically possible in the real
world and what one would really do in
the real world because that's imaginary
that's never happened before and insofar
as things like that might have happened
somewhere at some point we call those
things edge cases it doesn't affect the
general rule the general approach to
life that people have and also in these
situations and what david has just
hinted at there is that language is
there to solve a problem and so
again once more you you listen to
certain philosophers on certain podcasts
at times people get interviewed and they
invent words they invent terms of
vocabulary and they think that by
inventing these words they're solving
some problem but in fact what they're
doing
they're exacerbating the problem they're
they're
generating issues that weren't there
before the prevailing existing view
the way of talking about these things
solves certain problems might have
certain open problems but their
invention of new words it just
introduces yet more problems without
solving anything existing they're often
trying to say i've discovered something
because i've invented a term here i've
got a piece of jargon
and that solves the problem it doesn't
dissolve the problem at all you're
describing the problem using new bits of
language and inventing that's
proliferation of language neologisms
it's just something i always irritates
me sometimes it's unavoidable of course
when a scientists when a thinker really
truly does come up with a solution
because they postulate the existence of
entities that he the two we didn't know
about of course you need a new word for
that you know you need the word electron
once someone has figured out that there
is this little particle that carries
this little negative charge we need a
word for that okay fine fine we accept
that but there are many cases where the
proliferation of language
seeks to obscure what's really going on
rather than solving an actual problem
always ask
what problem are you trying to solve you
know you're introducing this new term
what what is the specific problem you're
trying to solve let's talk about
solutions
rather than inventing words that are
only kind of describing a problem that's
out there i'll hop off my hobby course
now i'll pick it up where david is uh
going on to uh just hammer his point
home to the crypto inductivist and he
says quote your theory asserts the
existence of a physical anomaly which is
not present according to the prevailing
theory the anomaly is my alleged
immunity from gravity certainly you can
invent a language which expresses this
anomaly implicitly so that statements of
your theory of gravity need not refer to
it explicitly but refer to what they do
arose by any other name would smell as
sweet suppose that you indeed suppose
that everyone were a native speaker of
your language and believed your theory
of gravity to be true suppose that we
all took it entirely for granted and
thought it's so natural that we use the
same word for x fall to describe what
you or i would do if we jumped over the
railing none of that alters in the
slightest degree the obvious difference
there would be between my response to
gravity and everything else's
if you fell over the railing you might
well envy me on the way down you might
well think if only i could respond to
gravity as david does rather than in
this entirely different way that i do
end quote and perfectly right right
remember what's going on the guy is
claiming the crypto inductivist is
claiming that if david jumps over you
know he's going to float but everywhere
else
every other time anything else happens
the the prevailing theory just operates
as normal
this is one of those situations where
you know you can imagine a philosopher
making this argument it's like well why
are you even asking what problem are you
solving they're saying well i want to
figure out exactly why we should just
well we should be justified in relying
upon the predictions of our existing
explanations well i'm telling you there
is only one explanation and then they go
down this long road where
it even requires the invention of a new
language in order to try and explain a
problem that doesn't exist it's just not
a problem it just isn't an issue that
david is going to float and everything
else is going to fall that's not the
situation we're in if it was
then that would be a genuine problem as
david says there then everyone would be
wondering why is it that the laws of
gravity appear to have selected david
deutsch out of everyone in the entire
universe for special treatment what's
going on there
that would be a problem and there would
need to be an account of that but that's
not the situation we're in
it's all in the crypto inductivist head
kind of like a trolley problem right
it's all in your head
that you need to push the fat man off
the bridge in order to save the others
it's in your head that's not happening
can we talk about something real
then that's where the interesting
philosophy comes in philosophy is most
interesting not when you're talking
about to my mind the things like
descartes demon and the simulation
hypothesis and a far distant future
existential threats
it's the here and now
it's problems right now that need
addressing right now and which people
are struggling to find answers to and
maybe some people just give up and like
oh look that's too hard i'm not going to
worry about trying to deal with the
issue
right now
of things like coercion that exists in
society let me talk about the far
distant future
i can deal with that i can deal with the
the science fiction reality of the year
3000 when you know these the ais are
going to take over that's more fun to
talk about
this is philosophy though this is
sometimes what passes for philosophy and
the crypto inductivist is still just
rattling on i encourage you to read the
the the entire chapter i'm not going to
as i say so i'm skipping a number of
pages and i'll i'll just pick it up
where david says quote theories
postulating anomalies without explaining
them are less likely than their rivals
to make true predictions more generally
it is a principle of rationality that
theories are postulated only in order to
solve problems therefore any postulate
which solves no problem is to be
rejected that is because a good
explanation qualified by such a
postulate becomes a bad explanation end
quote yes and as i was just saying about
you know
philosophers who like to consider
problems of the distant future what's
going to happen in the year 2500
when the agi are finally here are they
going to take over all of humanity it's
like you're inventing a problem of the
future we're not there yet that's not
our problem right now
you know how we should start preparing
for war with the agi
or with the aliens that we haven't
detected yet
this kind of stuff is solving no problem
it's not really part of rational
discussion i mean it's fun
but it's more in the realm as i like to
say of science fiction now science
fiction can be useful and
you know this is kind of a fun thing to
do
late on a friday night after you've had
a beer or wine with a friend to discuss
the possibilities of the encounter
between alien life and humanity and what
problems might be involved then but it's
not our problem situation right now it's
this is not the problem we have right
now there are problems right now i'm not
saying anyone should not necessarily
think about those things those things
can't be fun what i'm saying is that
that's not a part of serious
philosophical discussion and rationality
as much as people get out there onto
podcasts and start talking about these
things you're not solving any problems
right now there are problems right now
there are problems right now that a
philosopher should direct their
attention to people love to listen to
stories and hypotheses about what ufos
are and people speculate about what
these different things are but insofar
as it's a problem it's not a serious
problem if the star destroyer populated
by stormtroopers appears in the sky and
is as big as an entire city
then we've got a problem let's talk
about it then should we prepare for that
no why not why shouldn't we prepare for
the distant future of things because
there is an infinite number of things we
can imagine that are terrible off into
the distant future but learned people
all tend to agree that this particular
problem about
catastrophic ai apocalypses is the most
important problem i don't care i don't
care that there's so many of these
people talking about that particular
thing it's not our situation now i think
that those people have perhaps too much
time on their hands
they should be focusing their brain
power on problems of today right now
rather than being concerned about
existential threats of tomorrow but of
course people can do what they like
okay i want to pick up something that
i mentioned and i prefaced in the
immediate previous episode of topcast
when i was talking about corroboration
and
well well the issue is this let me just
read apart here and the crypto
inductivist is saying that he's
beginning to agree with david and he
says quote now that i understand there
really is an objective difference
between theories which make
unexplained predictions and theories
which don't i must admit that this does
look promising as a solution to the
problem of induction you seem to have
discovered a way of justifying your
future reliance on the theory of gravity
given only the past problem situation
skipping a little and david says it was
not i who discovered this and the crypto
inductability says well i don't think
poppa did either for one thing popper
did not think that scientific theories
could be justified at all
you make a careful distinction between
theories being justified by observations
as inductivists think and being
justified by argument but papa made no
such distinction and in regard to the
problem of induction he actually said
that although future predictions of a
theory cannot be justified we should act
as though they were and david says i
don't think he said that exactly if he
did he didn't really mean it pausing
there just my reflection yeah i kind of
get this impression as well from my
reading of poppa especially recently and
as i said in the last episode papa just
wrote
so many thousands of words thousands of
pages thousands of words and so it gets
hard it's like me you know talking here
on top guys you kind of it's hard to
keep track of what you did say in the
past i feel i feel as though i've got a
reasonably coherent worldview and people
ask me about aspects of it and i can
respond near immediately to
what i think is the case but i can
certainly imagine misspeaking now and
again or not quite constructing the
sentences precisely in the same way that
i
did in the past as i will in the future
because it's just hard to keep track of
everything we're human now papa is
operating in a time where he's writing
by hand or he's typing or whatever it
happens to be the case and trying to
keep track of everything he's he's
written and indeed he says of himself
that he changes his mind between the
logic of scientific discovery through
realism in the aim of science and
various other things and i do get the
impression that he said well you know he
didn't really mean to say things like
you can confirm your theory okay
there are confirming instances of the
theory that's one thing he actually says
he actually he actually rejects a
version of himself
in realism in the aim of science and so
just let me just repeat what david says
there are basically on the same topic
the crypto inductivist has just said in
regard to the problem of induction he
popper said that although future
predictions of a theory cannot be
justified we should act as though they
were david says
i don't think he said that exactly if he
did he didn't really mean it the
kryptonite says what
and david says or if he did mean it he
was mistaken why are you so upset it is
perfectly possible for a person to
discover a new theory in this case
popular in epistemology but nevertheless
to continue to hold beliefs that
contradict it the more profound the
theory is the more likely this is to
happen
crypto inductivist says are you claiming
to understand papa's theory better than
he did himself and david says i neither
know nor care the reverence that
philosophers show for the historical
sources of ideas is very perverse you
know in science we do not consider the
discoverer of a theory to have any
special insight into it on the contrary
we hardly ever consult original sources
they invariably become obsolete as the
problem situations that prompted them
are transformed by the discoveries
themselves
for example most relativity theorists
today understand einstein's theory
better than he did
the founders of quantum theory made a
complete mess of understanding their own
theory such shaky beginnings are to be
expected and when we stand upon the
shoulders of giants it may not be all
that hard to see further than they did
but in any case
surely it is more interesting to argue
about what the truth is than about what
some particular thinker however great
did or did not think end quote isn't
that marvelous that's perfect i i agree
entirely with that no one learning
science learns from the original
research papers no one attempted to
learn special relativity should go back
to i don't know einstein's original
paper presumably in german by the way
no one consults the original
struggling attempts to understand the
photoelectric effect and the beginnings
of quantum theory no you don't even go
to everett's papers
you go to the beginning of infinity you
go to
modern accounts of how to understand
this stuff modern textbooks in many many
cases
explain things so much better it's you
know sometimes the scientists people can
be brilliant scientists and make great
insights and yet be terrible
communicators of their ideas it takes
other reasonably good scientists who are
better communicators to distill out what
is actually being said and then perhaps
textbook writers who are
a different kind of person again to
distill out what the
good communicators of science are
actually saying about the truth of
science and then you end up with
textbooks which can be quite good
accounts of our best existing theories
and then eventually after all of that
you might get popular accounts of what's
going on which can be even better
sometimes worse sometimes misleading
sometimes they introduce yet new
misconceptions but you know this is if
you want to understand something is why
you should read widely a whole bunch of
different things certainly this has been
my experience of
reading some of the research papers
reading some of the textbooks and then
reading some of the popular science
books and being able to see what they
all have in common where they agree on
what the experiments are saying what
actually makes rational sense what
actually accounts for what's going on
what has the best explanations which is
one of the reasons i am so fixated on
david deutsch's worldview which talks so
much about explanations puts
explanations at the center of
rational understanding that if you don't
understand something that's a problem
but it might not be you that's the
problem it could be the person
ostensibly doing the explaining the
textbook the lecturer whatever they
could just be
not understanding the phenomena
themselves and giving you a
non-explanation being evasive and so you
have to somehow or rather find the
person that knows the stuff and is able
to explain it well what you don't want
in physics for example is an
instrumentalist and yet they are a dime
a dozen they're out there and they just
say well let's just crank through the
formulae let's just figure out how to do
the calculations there you go you're a
physicist well
you know you might be competent at the
mathematics that's turning the handle
which at one end you put in your initial
conditions and out the other end you get
your final conditions you get your
solution and you don't really understand
what's going on you don't understand
what the turning of the handle is really
all about
you may not
appreciate what reality really consists
of in fact you may have even been told
you can't understand what reality
consists of not even approximately there
is no understanding reality the best you
can do is to predict the outcome of
experiments and this is all wrong okay
this is all wrong but people who first
discover a theory they're struggling to
understand stuff and so they're throwing
stuff at the blackboard and the
whiteboard and you know writing papers
and trying to get other people to see if
they can understand it as well and if
they agree with the results and what
their conclusions might be and people
are hypothesizing things and it takes
some time for the dust to settle so to
speak okay so i'm going to pick it up
where the crypto inductivist almost gets
the idea and
then
falls back into bad ways of thinking
because they say quote look you david
have justified a theory about the future
the prevailing theory of gravity as
being more reliable than another theory
the one i proposed
even though they are both consistent
with all currently known observations
since the prevailing theory applies both
to the future and to the past you have
justified the proposition that as
regards gravity the future resembles the
past and the same would hold whenever
you justify a theory as reliable on the
grounds that it is corroborated
now in order to go from corroborated to
reliable you examine the theory's
explanatory power so what you have shown
is that what we might call the principle
of seeking better explanations together
with some observations yes and arguments
imply that the future will in many
respects resemble the past and that is a
principle of induction
if your explanation principle implies a
principle of induction then logically it
is a principle of induction so
inductivism is true after all and a
principle of induction does indeed have
to be postulated explicitly or
implicitly before we can predict the
future and david says oh dear this
inductivism really is a virulent disease
having gone into remission for only a
few seconds it now returns more
violently than before and the crypto
inductivist says does papyrian
rationalism justify ad hominem arguments
as well i ask for information only
david says i apologize
let me go straight to the substance of
what you said
yes i have justified an assertion about
the future you say this implies that the
future resembles the past well vacuously
yes in as much as any theory about the
future would assert that it resembled
the past in some sense but this
inference that the future resembles the
past is not the sought after principle
of induction for we could neither derive
nor justify any theory or prediction
about the future from it for example we
could not use it to distinguish your
theory of gravity from the prevailing
one for they both say in their own way
that the future resembles the past yes
end quote and by the way here
an explanation that sort of suggests
that the past resembles a future as
david says there well that's a vacuous
claim it's like
a universal theory of gravity or
anything else
is universal which means the future
resembles the past the past resembles
the future the knee resembles the fire
in this respect
of obeying that law that's all it's like
you know
any claim in relativity about the
constancy of the speed of light the
speed of light is constant the speed of
light was constant at the beginning of
the universe the speed of light was
constant 10 billion years ago the speed
of light was constant one billion years
ago the speed of light is constant today
and the speed of light will constantly
move that's not a principle of induction
it's just because you're saying that
these things are the same
is not going to justify some theory
it's just a
logical conclusion or a logical thing
that you can say that falls out of what
we understand about relativity our best
explanation of
space time and light in this particular
case as david goes on to say and i'm
skipping a bit but he says quote nothing
in the concepts of rational argument or
explanation relates the future to the
past in any special way nothing is
postulated about anything resembling
anything nothing of that sort would help
if it were postulated in the vacuous
sense in which the very concept of
explanation implies that the future
resembles the past it nevertheless
implies nothing specific about the
future so it is not a principle of
induction there is no principle of
induction there is no process of
induction no one ever uses them or
anything like them and there is no
longer a problem of induction is that
clear now
and the crypto inductivist says yes
please excuse me for a few moments while
i adjust my entire world view
now david goes on to explain well let me
read part of his uh explanation he says
quote to in response to the crypto
inductivist as we have agreed your
theory consists objectively of a theory
of gravity the prevailing theory
qualified by an unexplained prediction
about me it says that i would float
unsupported unsupported means without
any upward force acting on me so the
suggestion is that i would be immune to
the force of gravity which would
otherwise pull me down but according to
the general theory of relativity gravity
is not a force but a manifestation of
the curvature of spacetime this
curvature explains why unsupported
objects like myself and the earth move
closer together with time therefore in
the light of modern physics your theory
is presumably saying there is an upward
force on me as required to hold me at a
constant distance from the earth but
where does that force come from and how
does it behave end quote david does go
on but you know we can just see here
that this unsupported assertion about
reality that the crypto inductivist has
introduced
creates more problems it doesn't solve
anything it creates more problems and
our project is in science and everywhere
else
to solve problems so that we can move on
to better problems not introduce new
problems that weren't there before so
that we've actually ruined the existing
solution no that's not what we're
supposed to be doing and this by the way
is why you know there's this trope idea
among physicists
that retired engineers tend to go into
proving einstein wrong
using simple algebra they they show you
that well the speed of light can't be
constant or you can travel faster than
the speed of light or any number of
things that there's no such thing as the
relativity of simultaneity of the
relativity of time and all this kind of
stuff so
the problem with these approaches for
for any
physicist who receives such a letter
from a retired engineer it's a bit
unfair to these poor retired engineers
i'm sure they're not all retired
engineers but
physicists know what i'm talking about
they receive emails and letters of this
kind you know such and such has
got the new theory of relativity
they're never solving any problem
they're never solving an existing
problem in science what they're doing is
they're objecting on common sense
grounds to some conclusion of relativity
let's say they don't like the idea that
there should be a relativity of
simultaneity that
that things appear to happen at the same
time or not depending upon whether
you're moving or not
with those things that are happening at
the same time or they don't like the
idea that lengths can contract if you
move faster then things get shorter they
don't like the idea that the speed of
light is constant any number of things
like this and so because they don't like
it they invent a new theory that far
from solving any problems
breaks the existing theory the theory of
relativity and introduces new problems
so then it means that well we can't
explain what's going on if we were to
use the retired engineers explanation of
reality we can't explain what's going on
in places like the large hadron collider
we can't explain what's going on with
the gps system which we can explain
perfectly well using general relativity
and in many cases special relativity as
well and so this is the issue here you
you you aren't solving a real problem
what you're doing in those situations is
you don't understand something and
you're trying to understand something
and rather than
trying harder to understand something by
asking questions of people who might
know more who in a patient way will
explain it to you you just say i'm
throwing it all out and i'm telling you
what the truth is
being a little dogmatic let's say after
a little more back and forth we again
come back to david saying quote your
additional postulate is not just
superfluous it is positively bad
in general perverse but unrefuted
theories which one can propose off the
cuff fall roughly into two categories
there are theories that postulate
unobservable entities such as particles
that do not interact with other matter
they can be rejected for solving nothing
occam's razor if you like and there are
theories like yours that predict
unexplained observable anomalies they
could be rejected for solving nothing
and spoiling existing solutions
it is not i hate to add that they
conflict with existing observations it
is that they remove the explanatory
power from existing theories by
asserting that the predictions of those
theories have exceptions but not
explaining how end quote the crypto
inductor says
i see that now now will you give me help
in adjusting my world view
david says well have you read my book
the fabric of reality
but what the the crypto inductivist
thing goes on to ask of david well he
says quote what i cannot understand is
where in that raw material past
observations the present problem
situation and timeless principles of
logic and rationality none of which
justifies inferences from the past into
the future the justification of future
predictions has come from there seems to
be a logical gap are we making a hidden
assumption somewhere and david responds
no there is no logical gap what you call
our raw material does indeed include
assertions about the future the best
existing theories which cannot be
abandoned lightly because they are the
solutions of problems contain
predictions about the future and these
predictions cannot be severed from the
theory's other content as you tried to
because that would spoil the theory's
explanatory power any new theory we
propose must therefore either be
consistent with these existing theories
which has implications for what the new
theory can say about the future or
contradict some existing theories but
address the problems thereby raised
giving alternative explanations which
again constrains what they can say about
the future and the crypto inductance
says so we have no principle of
reasoning which says that the future
will resemble the past but we do have
actual theories which say that
so do we have actual theories which
imply a limited form of inductive
principle david says no
our theories simply assert something
about the future
vacuously any theory about the future
implies that the future will resemble
the past in some ways but we only find
out in what respects the theory says
that the future will resemble the past
after we have the theory you might as
well say that since our theories hold
features of reality to be the same
throughout space they imply a spatial
principle of induction to the effect
that the near resembles the distant let
me point out that in any practical sense
of the word resemble our present
theories say that the future will not
resemble the past the cosmological big
crunch for instance the re-collapse of
the universe to a single point is an
event that some cosmologists predict but
which is just about as unlike the
present epoch in every physical sense as
it possibly could be the very laws from
which we predict its currents will not
apply to it end quote and exactly the
same argument applies with not know of
cosmology today the far distant future
apparently given what we know now and
this is very much open to
change given future observations and
future theories of course is that this
dark energy is going to continue to
accelerate the expansion of space such
that everything gets ripped apart in
this kind of big rip event where even
atomic nuclei and fundamental particles
get torn apart and everything turns into
photons and you know at that point if
you listen to someone like roger penrose
you have at the very end of time after
this happens
something that looks very much like the
beginning of time namely
a universe or a space that contains no
matter and nothing but photons which is
precisely what the big bang was like
anyway that's off topic but the point is
that right now the present doesn't
resemble the past the big bang and it
doesn't resemble the future which is
this far distant big rip future
who knows i'm skipping past a bit where
they get into a discussion about what
justifies as being true the principles
of logic and how these justifications
for logic isn't perfectly secure and
david agrees it's not perfectly secure
we can't expect it to be what we want
are good explanations of course we want
explanations about why and how
rationality works they come across the
turing principle and the krypton doctors
ask how we know it's true and david says
we don't know of course
in fact let me just read what he says on
that you know when he's confronted with
you know is the turing principle true
david says we don't know of course if
it's true or not but you are afraid
aren't you that if we can't justify the
turing principle then we shall once
again have lost our justification for
relying on scientific predictions
and the crypto inductance says
yes
david says but we have now moved on to a
completely different question we are now
discussing an apparent fact about
physical reality namely that it can make
reliable predictions about itself end
quote that's in the form of us right we
are the thing that makes reliable
predictions about the future so we are
part of physical reality that makes
reliable predictions about physical
reality continuing david says we are
trying to explain that fact to place it
within the same framework as other facts
we know i suggested that there may be a
certain law of physics involved but if i
were wrong about that indeed even if we
were entirely unable to explain this
remarkable property of reality that
would not detract one jot from the
justification of any scientific theory
for it would not make the explanation in
such a theory one jot worse and the
crypto inductable says
now my arguments are exhausted
intellectually i am convinced yet i must
confess that i still feel what i can
only describe as an emotional doubt
[Laughter]
and david says a few things but then
gets to the meat of the matter and says
quote the misconception is about the
very nature of argument and explanation
you seem to be assuming that arguments
and explanations such as those that
justify acting on a particular theory
have the form of mathematical proofs
proceeding from assumptions to
conclusions
you look for the raw material axioms
from which our conclusions theorems are
derived now there is indeed a logical
structure of this type associated with
every successful argument or explanation
but the process of argument does not
begin with the axioms and end with the
conclusion
rather it starts in the middle with a
version that is riddled with
inconsistencies gaps ambiguities and
irrelevancies all these faults are
criticized attempts are made to replace
faulty theories the theories that are
criticized and replaced usually include
some of the axioms
that is why it is a mistake to assume
that an argument begins with or is
justified by the theories that
eventually serve as its axioms the
argument ends tentatively when it seems
to have shown that the associated
explanation is satisfactory the axioms
adopted are not ultimate unchallengeable
beliefs they are tentative explanatory
theories end quote yeah and all i would
say there just in other words is the
argument ends tentatively when it seems
to have
solved the problem
solve the problem to the satisfaction of
whoever had the problem and that could
be the community of scientists or an
individual scientist working on a
particular issue
so that that's the way things go and it
doesn't just have to be science of
course this applies universally to
all problem situations and all kinds of
knowledge creation the crypto
inductivists finally agrees and he says
quote i see
argument is not the same species of
thing as deduction
or the non-existent induction it is not
based on anything or justified by
anything and it doesn't have to be
because its purpose is to solve problems
to show that a given problem is solved
by a given explanation and david says
welcome to the club
and the crypto inductivist has now been
retitled ex-inductivist
and he says all these years i have felt
so secure in my great problem i felt so
superior both to the ancient
inductivists and to the upstart popper
and all the time without even knowing it
i was a crypto inductivist myself
inductivism is indeed a disease it makes
one blind
[Laughter]
and there are a few more remarks at the
end there but we may as well also throw
into the bin here the bayesians the
modern incantation of inductivists okay
they they they have this
induction-shaped hole in their
epistemology almost everyone who's not a
papillion does so-called objectivists do
as well they
seek a principle of introduction this
secure foundation from which they can
derive explanations in the same way that
mathematical proofs are derived it's as
if as david says elsewhere in the fabric
of reality there's this hierarchy of
knowledge creation or of argumentation
where mathematics is the king of all
knowledge and everything seeks to aspire
to be like mathematics to start with the
secure foundation with axioms that are
self-evident that are absolutely true
that cannot be denied and from that you
just use your rules of inference which
presumably also are completely inherent
that can only produce truth from truth
and you get thereby true conclusions
this way of thinking about reality and
the way of constructing knowledge is
completely misconceived among other
things
who says and who can prove and why
should we believe that the axioms are
themselves absolutely true we don't know
if the process is this method of
deduction in order to generate true
conclusions if that's the process then
where for the axioms how did we get
these true axioms in the first place as
david said say you start in the middle
we start with a problem and it's a messy
kind of process of creating an
explanation no one really knows how it
happens yet we don't have an explanation
for creativity yet we just know that we
come up with these creative explanations
of reality they hardly vary because each
part of the explanation corresponds to
some part of reality postulating into
existence some physical thing when it
comes to science something that is
accounted for by the explanation so
that's where we'll leave chapter seven
of the fabric of reality next time once
i do come back to the fabric of reality
we'll be on to
the significance of life which is
chapter eight all about evolution by
natural selection but until then bye-bye
[Music]
uh
up